in my last video i asked you whether you
want to see me code a trading algorithm
in python from scratch
the overwhelming majority of you wanted
to see me do this
so that's exactly what i'm going to do
in this video to create this trading
algorithm
i will be using the quant connect
platform which is a great algorithmic
trading platform
with lots of great features and besides
that it is free to use
so if you want to code along make sure
to quickly create a free account before
watching this video
there's a link in the description box
below with that being said
let's get started with creating our
first trading bot
but before we start actually
implementing our algorithm we must first
develop a trading strategy on a
conceptual level
for this video we're going to try to
implement a simple breakout strategy
this strategy will look at the past
highs of a given instrument
and generate a buy signal as soon as the
price manages to break out from its
previous high
after buying the security we'll want to
send out a trading stop loss
that follows the price upwards as long
as the price continues to rise
our stop-loss will do so as well but as
soon as it drops
more than a certain amount the position
will be closed the idea behind this
trading stop-loss
is to cut our losers short and let the
winners run
when developing trading algorithms it is
very important to be very precise with
what you want
identifying when a significant price
breakout occurs might be very easy for
us
but it isn't necessarily obvious for a
bot if for instance we look at this
chart there are many potential breakout
levels
unlike humans an algorithm can't just
use its judgment to determine which
level is the best
therefore we have to specify how a
breakout is defined for our strategy to
work
the easiest approach for this would be
to say that we look at the closing
prices for the last three months
and whatever price is the highest is our
breakout level
but here the question arises of why do
we look at three months
why not one month or one year or some
other time frame
that's why we don't just want to pick
some random number as our lookback
length
instead we want our algorithm to
dynamically determine how far
it looks back for a breakout level based
on the security's volatility
if volatility is high we want to look
further into the past than when
volatility is relatively low
by doing this the algorithm will
automatically adapt to changes in
volatility
so to quickly recap the strategy that
we're going to implement is a simple
breakout strategy
that dynamically changes its lookback
length furthermore it uses a trading
stop loss to protect against potential
losses
with that being said let's head over to
the quant connect platform and actually
start writing some code
in the quant connect platform we click
on create new algorithm which brings up
a bunch of modules as well as a basic
template algorithm
these modules are all part of the
algorithm framework and they allow you
to use pre-built parts of code that can
be helpful for certain trading
strategies
if you want to learn more about the
algorithm framework you could check out
my video about how trading algorithms
work
in this video we won't be using any of
these modules since our algorithm is
fairly simple
by default you will now see your
algorithm as an extension of the quant
connect algorithm class
furthermore you will see the initialize
and on data methods
like the name implies the initialize
method exists to initialize various
parameters
variables and other settings for
instance this is where we can initialize
the starting capital start date
and end date for our back tests but more
on that in a minute
before we do anything else let's import
numpy as np
since we will later need numpy to
calculate the standard deviation for the
volatility adjusted lookback length
after doing that let's start with the
initialize method for this
let's clear out everything and start
with a blank method
firstly we will set our starting cash
balance this is obviously only for back
testing purposes
in real trading this figure will be
taken from your broker's account balance
for this example let's just use 100 000
as a starting balance
next up let's set the start and end date
for the back tests
for now it really doesn't matter what we
choose here just make sure to leave
enough data untouched so that you have
some data to test your algorithm without
overfitting it
now we will add an asset to our
algorithm this will be the security that
we're actually going to use for trading
to do this we're going to use the add
equity function
the first parameter is the symbol of the
equity that we want to add
and the second parameter is the
resolution of the data we're going to
use daily data for now
but it is also possible to use hourly or
minutely data
as for the security we will use the etf
spy
that tracks the s p 500 index but feel
free to use other securities
the next step is to initialize the
number of days that we will look back to
determine the breakout point
you hopefully remember that our
algorithm will dynamically change this
look back length
based on changes in volatility that's
why it isn't that important what value
we choose here
even though we want our anger to
dynamically change the look back length
we also want to add some constraints we
don't want the look back length to get
too big or too small
that's why i will add an opera and lower
limit for now i will choose 10 days as a
lower limit
and 30 days as an upper limit this
choice isn't really based on anything
though
so you could definitely try different
values if you want to
the last two variables that we want to
initialize are relevant for our trading
stop loss
the first variable self dot initial stop
risk
indicates how close our first stop loss
will be to the securities
price so 0.98 means that our first stop
loss will allow for a 2
loss before it gets hit the next
variable
self.trading stock risk indicates how
close our trading stop will follow the
assets price
here i chose 0.9 which means that it
will trade the price by 10
i know this is quite large but we want
to give the price enough room to move in
since we otherwise might get stopped out
at every short-term reversal
note that the value 0.98 and 0.9
are quite arbitrary choices you could
definitely use other values for these
variables if you want to
next up let's quickly talk about the on
data method the on data method is called
every time your algorithm receives new
data this method can then decide what to
do with the data
and if any action should be taken
instead of using the on data method for
any trading
we will create our own method since this
gives us even more freedom
but we will use the ondata method to
create a plot of the price of the
security that we are trading
since this gives us a benchmark to
compare our algorithm's performance to
this can be done with self.plot which
takes three arguments
the first is the name of the chart that
we want to create the second is the name
of this plot on this chart
and the last is the actual data for the
plot we will call the chart
data chart and the plot will just be the
symbol of our security
in this case this will be spy and
finally the data will just be our
security's closing price
now let us create a method that actually
does all the trading for us
we will name it every market open since
we will want it to be called after every
market open
to accomplish this we will have to add
one last thing to our initialize method
namely the schedule on function which
takes three parameters
the first specifies on which days our
method is called
we want it to be called every day that
our security trades
the next parameter specifies at which
time our method is called
we want it to be called 20 minutes after
our securities market open
and last but not least we specify which
method is called namely our
every market open method
if you're unsure how many arguments a
function takes or what type the
arguments are
you can search for it in the top left
corner this will bring you to the
documentation page which explains how
everything works and often provides
helpful examples
now that we have initialized everything
let's implement our every market open
method
first we need to determine the look back
length for our breakout
to do this we will look at 30 day
volatility today
and compare it with the same value
yesterday we will then use this
information to adjust
the length of our lookback window for
this
we first need the closing process of our
security over the past 31 days
this can be accomplished by calling the
history method
this returns a data frame with the close
high
low and open price as well as the volume
for each day
over the past 31 days we are only
interested in the close price though
to calculate the volatility we take the
standard deviation of the closing
process over the past 30 days
this is where we use the numpy standard
deviation function np.std
first we do this for the current day and
then we do it for the day before that
then we take the normalized difference
of these two by subtracting yesterday's
value from today's
and then dividing by today's value
[Music]
now we multiply the current lookback
length by delta val plus one
this ensures that our lookback length
increases when volatility increase
and vice versa
[Music]
since our lookback variable is the
number of days it has to be an integer
therefore we round our result to the
nearest integer
next up we check if the resulting look
back length is within our previously
defined upper
and lower limits if it isn't we make
sure it is and otherwise we do nothing
[Music]
the next task is to check whether a
breakout is happening
for this we once again call the history
function to get a list of all daily
price highs from the period within our
lookback length
we save this list in the variable
self.hi
before we open any position we have to
check two conditions
the first is that we aren't currently
already invested and the second is
that the breakout is actually happening
to check that we aren't invested in our
symbol already we can use
securities.invested
the second condition can be checked by
looking at the last closing price and
checking whether it is higher than the
highest high from our self.high variable
note that we leave out the last data
point of our self.hi list since we don't
want to compare yesterday's high with
yesterday's close
if these two conditions are met we want
to buy spy at the market price
the easiest way to accomplish this is by
using the set holdings method
the first parameter of set holdings is
the security that we want to trade
and the second parameter is the
percentage of our portfolio that should
be allocated to this position
since the algorithm won't be trading any
other securities we will set the
holdings to 100 percent
before moving on we save the breakout
level to the variable
self.breakout level
furthermore we will set the variable
self.highest price to this breakout
level
[Music]
we will use this variable for our
trailing stop loss in a minute
now all that's left to do is implement
the trailing stop loss
the trading stop loss is only relevant
when we already have an open position
therefore we first have to check this
condition just like before we can do
this with self.securities.invested
next up we want to send out a stop loss
if we haven't done so already
so we check if there are any orders with
self.transactions.getopenorders
which returns a collection of open
orders for our security
if the collection is empty the if
condition is fulfilled
in that case we send a stop loss order
by using self dot stop market order
which takes three arguments
[Music]
the first one is the symbol of the
security that we want to trade
the second one is the number of shares
and the last argument is the stop loss
price
in our case we want a stop loss for our
entire position
which is why we use portfolio dot
quantity to find out how many shares we
own
note that the minus symbolizes a sell
order
for the stop loss price we multiply the
breakout level by self dot initial stop
risk
which we initialized to 0.98 earlier
this gives us a risk of about 2 percent
but note that this number is a
relatively arbitrary choice and can
easily be changed
now we have implemented the code that
sends out the actual stop loss order
all that's missing now is the part that
turns this stop loss into a trailing
stop loss
to turn it into a trading stop loss we
save our stop loss into the variable
self.stop market ticket
so that we can access it later
every time our security makes new highs
we want our stop loss to rise as well
if the price does not make any new highs
we don't want our stop loss to move
that's why we use this if statement to
determine whether a new high was made
furthermore we don't want our trading
stop-loss to move below our initial
stop-loss price
therefore we always have to test this
condition before moving on
[Music]
if these two conditions are met we first
set the highest price to the latest
closing price since this now is the new
highest price
we then create an update order fields
object and save it to the variable
update fields
we will use this object to update the
order price of our stop loss so that it
rises together with the securities price
we calculate the new price by
multiplying our trailing stop risk level
that we initialize to 0.9 by the latest
closing price
then we update our existing stop loss
order with the update method
[Music]
lastly we want to print this new stop
price to the console so that we can
check the new order price every time
they get updated
here we can't just use the normal print
function though instead we have to use
self.debug which is quant connect's
equivalent to print
outside of the if condition we also want
to plot the stop price of our position
onto the data chart that we created
earlier doing so allows us to view where
our stop loss is
compared to the securities trading price
we call this new plot stop
price to get the necessary stop loss
data we use
self.stopmarketticket.getwithorderfield.stoprise
as an argument
now that we have done this we have
successfully written our first trading
algorithm
all that's left to do now is build and
back test it
earlier we specified the backtest period
from september 2017 to september 2020
but feel free to try out different time
periods if you want to
to backtest our algorithm we simply have
to click the test button up here
and then we have to wait for the back
test to finish up
when the back test is finished a
performance overview will be generated
at the top of this report you can see
some of the most relevant stats
such as realized and unrealized gains
returns fees
and more even though it's nice to see a
big profit up here
you shouldn't put too much weight on
these results depending on what time
frame you choose for your back tests
these figures can be very different
nevertheless it is nice to see that our
algorithm managed to generate a profit
over the chosen time frame
right below this bar we can view an
equity chart of our portfolio
this is a great way for us to quickly
see how our returns were distributed
otherwise there also are some other
charts and metrics that can be helpful
when analyzing your algorithm's
performance
at the top right you can select which
chart should be displayed
let's quickly look at the data chart
which is the custom chart we created for
our elgo
as you can see it plots both spy's price
as well as the price of our trailing
stop orders
in my opinion this is a great way to see
where our strategy performed well
and where it didn't
otherwise you might also notice this
research guide on the right hand side
this tells us how often we have back
tested our algorithm how many parameters
it has
and how much time we have spent on it
these metrics can give you an indication
for how overfit your algorithm
potentially is so generally speaking
fewer back tests and parameters are
better than many
in this algorithm an example of a
parameter is the operand lower limit for
our look back length
or the risk percentage for our stop-loss
instead of having some arbitrary number
you could have a more dynamic approach
in which the algorithm calculates its
own optimal values
such an adaptive and dynamic algorithm
will usually be less prone for
overfitting
since it can adapt for changing market
conditions
if you scroll down further we also get
an overview of some other helpful
metrics
here we can see that our algorithm made
nine trades over these three years
it had a win rate of fifty percent but
the average win was much bigger than the
average
loss a very helpful metric to look at is
the sharp ratio which measures the
return compared to the risk that was
taken
the higher this ratio is the better for
our algorithm the sharp ratio over the
chosen time frame
is about 1 which isn't too bad
but once again i want to emphasize that
all these metrics are only for the exact
period that we chose to backtest
they can be significantly different and
worse over other time periods
lastly you can click on the console at
the bottom of the page to view what the
algorithm printed
if you remember our algorithm printed
the stop price of its trading stop every
time the price got updated
as you can see all these prices can be
seen here when back testing this doesn't
seem too helpful
but when fixing bugs or in live trading
it can sometimes be very handy to print
certain things to the console
before i end this video i want to
present to you how you can become an
algorithmic trader yourself
i really hope that this video gave you a
good overview of the algorithm
development process but i don't expect
you to be able to easily code your own
algorithms without any help
after watching one video if that's your
expectation you're setting yourself up
for disappointment
just like with coding and most other
skills the best way to get better
is by practicing it yourself if you
haven't used quant connect before they
offer a great free boot camp that walks
you through a bunch of other trading
algorithms
in my opinion this is a great way to get
more into algorithmic trading
and the quant connect platform if you
already know how to code in python
otherwise you can try to come up with
really simple strategy ideas
and then try to implement them with the
help of quantconnect's documentation
community posts and more if you want to
you can even copy my algorithm and try
to improve it
a few aspects that could be improved
would be to add dynamic position sizing
add a universe of stocks instead of just
having one make it more active
or you could try to make it more dynamic
by replacing parameters with other
models
in general if you want to play around
with the algorithm from this video
there's a link in the description box
below that allows you to copy the code
i just wouldn't recommend using this
algorithm for live trading since it's
not very well polished nor very well
researched
the main purpose of this algo was simply
to give you an introduction to
algorithmic trading and the quantconnect
platform
with that being said i really hope you
enjoyed this video and learned something
new
if you want me to create more videos in
which i develop and implement trading
algorithms like this one
definitely let me know by liking the
video and leaving a comment below
otherwise make sure to subscribe and
turn on the notification bell for more
content like this
thanks for watching